README.adoc, before:

= metanorma-plugin-lutaml

image:https://github.com/metanorma/metanorma-plugin-lutaml/workflows/rake/badge.svg["Build Status", link="https://github.com/metanorma/metanorma-plugin-lutaml/actions?workflow=rake"]

== Functionality

Metanorma plugin that allows you to access lutaml objects from a Metanorma document

=== Installation

[source,console]
----
$ gem install metanorma-plugin-lutaml
----

=== Usage, `lutaml` macro

Given `example.exp` file with the content:

[source,exp]
----
SCHEMA test_schema 'test';

(* Need select elements for measure_value *)
 REFERENCE FROM measure_schema
   (measure_value);

  TYPE my_type1 = EXTENSIBLE SELECT;
  END_TYPE;

  TYPE my_type2 = EXTENSIBLE ENUMERATION;
  END_TYPE;

  TYPE my_type3 = EXTENSIBLE ENUMERATION;
  END_TYPE;

  TYPE my_type4 = EXTENSIBLE ENUMERATION;
  END_TYPE;

  TYPE my_type5 = EXTENSIBLE ENUMERATION;
  END_TYPE;
END_SCHEMA;
----

And the `lutaml` macro block:

[source,adoc]
-----
[lutaml,example.exp,my_context]
----

{% for schema in my_context.schemas %}
== {{schema.id}}

{% for entity in schema.entities %}
=== {{entity.id}}
{% endfor %}

{% endfor %}
----
-----

Where:

* content within the block is called the "`template`";

* `{example.exp}` is the location of the EXPRESS schema file (`*.exp`) that
contains data to be loaded. Location of the file is computed relative to the
source directory that `[lutaml]` is used (e.g., if
`[lutaml,example.exp,my_context]` is invoked in an `.adoc` file located at
`/foo/bar/doc.adoc`, the data file is expected to be found at
`/foo/bar/example.exp`);

* `{my_context}` is the name where the EXPRESS Repository read from the .exp
file can be accessed with. Context object is a serialized
`Expressir::Model::Repository` object with all variable names available. See
https://github.com/lutaml/expressir[Expressir] docs for reference.
`{my_context}` has `schemas` method to access Expressir
https://github.com/lutaml/expressir/blob/master/lib/expressir/model/schema.rb[schemas]

Will produce this output:

[source,adoc]
-----
== test_schema

=== my_type1
=== my_type2
=== my_type3
=== my_type4
=== my_type5
-----

This macro also supports `.lutaml` files.

Instead of using the direct path to the file one can use `lutaml-express-index`
document attribute to supply directory with express files or YAML index file to
parse as well as the cache file location.

The syntax is as follows:

[source,adoc]
-----
:lutaml-express-index: my_custom_name; dir_or_index_path[; cache=cache_path]
-----

Where:

* `my_custom_name` - is name of the parsed EXPRESS files context for the later
use with lutaml macro

* `dir_or_index_path` - location of directory with EXPRESS files or path to the
YAML index file to parse

* `cache_path` - optional, location of the Expressir cache file to use

Example of usage:

[source,adoc]
-----
= Document title
Author
:lutaml-express-index: my_custom_name; /path/to/express_files; cache=/path/to/cache_file.yaml
[lutaml,my_custom_name,my_context]
----
{% for schema in my_context.schemas %}
== {{schema.id}}
{% endfor %}
----
-----

=== Usage, `lutaml_diagram` macro

This macro allows to quickly render lutaml file as diagram image.
Given `example.lutaml` file with the content:

[source,java]
----
diagram MyView {
  title "my diagram"

  enum AddressClassProfile {
    imlicistAttributeProfile: CharacterString [0..1] {
      definition
        this is multiline with `ascidoc`
      end definition
    }
  }

  class AttributeProfile {
    +addressClassProfile: CharacterString [0..1]
    imlicistAttributeProfile: CharacterString [0..1] {
      definition this is attribute definition
    }
  }
}
----

And the `lutaml_diagram` macro:

[source,adoc]
-----
lutaml_diagram::example.lutaml[]
-----

Will add diagram image to the document

Also one can use `lutaml_diagram` block with embed lutaml code instead of block macro. Example:

[source,java]
----
[lutaml_diagram]
....
diagram MyView {
  title "my diagram"

  enum AddressClassProfile {
    imlicistAttributeProfile: CharacterString [0..1] {
      definition
        this is multiline with `ascidoc`
      end definition
    }
  }

  class AttributeProfile {
    +addressClassProfile: CharacterString [0..1]
    imlicistAttributeProfile: CharacterString [0..1] {
      definition this is attribute definition
    }
  }
}
....
----


=== Usage, `lutaml_uml_attributes_table` macro

This macro allows to quickly render data model attributes/values tables.

Given `example.lutaml` file with the content:

[source,java]
----
diagram MyView {
  title "my diagram"

  enum AddressClassProfile {
    imlicistAttributeProfile: CharacterString [0..1] {
      definition
        this is multiline with `ascidoc`
      end definition
    }
  }

  class AttributeProfile {
    +addressClassProfile: CharacterString [0..1]
    imlicistAttributeProfile: CharacterString [0..1] {
      definition this is attribute definition
    }
  }
}
----

And the `lutaml_uml_attributes_table` macro:

[source,adoc]
-----
[lutaml_uml_attributes_table, example.lutaml, AttributeProfile]
-----

Will produce this output:

[source,adoc]
-----
=== AttributeProfile


.AttributeProfile attributes
|===
|Name |Definition |Mandatory/ Optional/ Conditional |Max Occur |Data Type

|addressClassProfile |TODO: enum 's definition |M |1 | `CharacterString`

|imlicistAttributeProfile |this is attribute definition with multiply lines |M |1 | `CharacterString`

|===
-----

In case of "enumeration"(AddressClassProfile) entity:

[source,adoc]
-----
[lutaml_uml_attributes_table, example.lutaml, AddressClassProfile]
-----

Will produce this output:

[source,adoc]
-----
=== AddressClassProfile


.AddressClassProfile values
|===
|Name |Definition

|imlicistAttributeProfile |this is multiline with `ascidoc`

|===
-----

=== Usage, `lutaml_uml_datamodel_description` macro

This macro allows to quickly render data model packages and its dependent
objects for supplied XMI file.

Given an Enterprise Architect `example.xmi` file with 2 packages:

* 'Another'
* 'CityGML'

The `lutaml_uml_datamodel_description` macro can be used:

[source,adoc]
-----
[lutaml_uml_datamodel_description, path/to/example.xmi]
--
[.before]
...
my text
...

[.diagram_include_block, base_path="requirements/"]
...
Diagram text
...

[.include_block, package="Another", base_path="spec/fixtures"]
...
my text
...

[.include_block, base_path="spec/fixtures"]
...
my text
...

[.before, package="Another"]
...
text before Another package
...

[.after, package="Another"]
...
text after Another package
...

[.after, package="CityGML"]
...
text after CityGML package
...

[.after]
...
footer text
...
--
--
-----

Where:

* `path/to/example.xmi` - required, path to the XMI file to render

* `[.before]` - macro to add additional text before the rendered output, can be used only once, additional occurrences of macro will overwrite text

* `[.after]` - macro to add additional text after the rendered output, can be used only once, additional occurrences of macro will overwrite text

* `[.after, package="Another"]` - macro with text to be inserted before(after in case of `.before` name) the package

* `[.diagram_include_block]` - macro to automatically include diagram images. Attribute `base_path` is a required attribute to supply path prefix where to look for a digram image. The logic is as follows:
[source,adoc]
-----
{% for diagram in package.diagrams %}
[[figure-{{ diagram.xmi_id }}]]
.{{ diagram.name }}
image::{{ image_base_path }}/{{ diagram.xmi_id }}.png[]

{% if diagram.definition %}
{{ diagram.definition | html2adoc }}
{% endif %}
{% endfor %}
-----
Eg: script will take package diagrams supplied in xmi file and will try to include `image` with the name equal to diagram' xmi_id attribute plus `.png`. Also one can add any text to the macro text, it will be added as paragraph before each image include.

* `[.diagram_include_block, package="Another"]` - same as above, but diagram will be included only for supplied package name

* `[.include_block, base_path="spec/fixtures"]` - macro to inlude files(adoc/liquid) for each package name. Attribute `base_path` is a required attribute to supply path prefix where to look for file to include. Macro will look for a file called `base_path` + `/` `_package_name`(downcase, replace : -> '', ' ' -> '_') + `.adoc`[`.liquid`], eg for package 'My Package name' and `base_path` eq to `my/path`, macro will look for the following file path: `my/path/_my_package_name.adoc`.

* `[.include_block, package="Another", base_path="spec/fixtures"]` - same as above, but include block will be included only for supplied package name


Will produce this output:

[source,adoc]
-----
my text
== CityGML package
=== CityGML overview

Diagram text

[[figure-EAID_ACBB5EE3_3428_40f5_9C7C_E41923419F29]]
.CityGML Package Diagram
image::requirements//EAID_ACBB5EE3_3428_40f5_9C7C_E41923419F29.png[]

BuildingFurnitureFunctionValue is a code list that enumerates the different purposes of a BuildingFurniture.

[[figure-EAID_938AE961_1C57_4052_B964_997D1894A58D]]
.Use of ISO and OASIS standards in CityGML
image::requirements//EAID_938AE961_1C57_4052_B964_997D1894A58D.png[]

The CityGML package is organized into
2 packages with 1 modules:

[arabic]
. Another package
. CityTML package

my text

Content for CityGML package

==== Defining tables

[arabic]
.<<tab-P-another-C-abstractatomictimeseries>> -- Elements of Another::AbstractAtomicTimeseries

[[tab-P-another-C-abstractatomictimeseries]]
.Elements of Another::AbstractAtomicTimeseries
[width="100%",cols="a,a,a,a,a,a,a,a"]
|===
h|Name: 7+| AbstractAtomicTimeseries
h|Definition: 7+|
h|Stereotype: 7+| interface
h|Abstract: 7+|
.1+h|Associations: 7+| (none)
.4+h|Public attributes:
| _Name_
2+| _Definition_
| _Derived_
| _Obligation_
| _Maximum occurrence_
| _Data type_
| adeOfAbstractAtomicTimeseries
2+|
|
| C
| *
| ADEOfAbstractAtomicTimeseries
| observationProperty
2+|
|
| M
| 1
| CharacterString
| uom
2+|
|
| C
| 1
| CharacterString
h|Constraints: 7+| (none)
|===

=== Additional Information

text after CityGML package
-----

In addition to just supplying XMI file, this macro also supports YAML
configuration file.

The format for using YAML is this:

[source,yaml]
-----
---
packages:
  # includes these packages
  - "Package *"
  - two*
  - three
  # skips these packages
  - skip: four
-----

Where:

* `packages` - required, root element with the list of strings or objects

* `Package *` - pattern matching, specifies lookup condition for packages to
render.
+
NOTE: In this example, it is equal to the following regular expression: `/^Package.*$/`

* `skip: four` - object with package name to skip

Usage with macro:

[source,adoc]
-----
[lutaml_uml_datamodel_description, path/to/example.xmi, path/to/config.yml]
....
-----

The macro processor will read supplied YAML file and arrange packages according
to the order supplied in the config file, also all packages supplied as `skip`
will be skipped during render

== Documentation

Please refer to https://www.metanorma.com.

Commit message:

https://github.com/metanorma/metanorma-plugin-lutaml/issues/34#issuecomment-895122518 `lutaml_figure` macro - support for diagram xmi_id lookup by package and diagram names. Support for mutiply internal diagrams lutaml_datamodel_description macro, fixes

README.adoc, after:

= metanorma-plugin-lutaml

image:https://github.com/metanorma/metanorma-plugin-lutaml/workflows/rake/badge.svg["Build Status", link="https://github.com/metanorma/metanorma-plugin-lutaml/actions?workflow=rake"]

== Functionality

Metanorma plugin that allows you to access lutaml objects from a Metanorma document

=== Installation

[source,console]
----
$ gem install metanorma-plugin-lutaml
----

=== Usage, `lutaml` macro

Given `example.exp` file with the content:

[source,exp]
----
SCHEMA test_schema 'test';

(* Need select elements for measure_value *)
 REFERENCE FROM measure_schema
   (measure_value);

  TYPE my_type1 = EXTENSIBLE SELECT;
  END_TYPE;

  TYPE my_type2 = EXTENSIBLE ENUMERATION;
  END_TYPE;

  TYPE my_type3 = EXTENSIBLE ENUMERATION;
  END_TYPE;

  TYPE my_type4 = EXTENSIBLE ENUMERATION;
  END_TYPE;

  TYPE my_type5 = EXTENSIBLE ENUMERATION;
  END_TYPE;
END_SCHEMA;
----

And the `lutaml` macro block:

[source,adoc]
-----
[lutaml,example.exp,my_context]
----

{% for schema in my_context.schemas %}
== {{schema.id}}

{% for entity in schema.entities %}
=== {{entity.id}}
{% endfor %}

{% endfor %}
----
-----

Where:

* content within the block is called the "`template`";

* `{example.exp}` is the location of the EXPRESS schema file (`*.exp`) that
contains data to be loaded. Location of the file is computed relative to the
source directory that `[lutaml]` is used (e.g., if
`[lutaml,example.exp,my_context]` is invoked in an `.adoc` file located at
`/foo/bar/doc.adoc`, the data file is expected to be found at
`/foo/bar/example.exp`);

* `{my_context}` is the name where the EXPRESS Repository read from the .exp
file can be accessed with. Context object is a serialized
`Expressir::Model::Repository` object with all variable names available. See
https://github.com/lutaml/expressir[Expressir] docs for reference.
`{my_context}` has `schemas` method to access Expressir
https://github.com/lutaml/expressir/blob/master/lib/expressir/model/schema.rb[schemas]

Will produce this output:

[source,adoc]
-----
== test_schema

=== my_type1
=== my_type2
=== my_type3
=== my_type4
=== my_type5
-----

This macro also supports `.lutaml` files.

Instead of using the direct path to the file one can use `lutaml-express-index`
document attribute to supply directory with express files or YAML index file to
parse as well as the cache file location.

The syntax is as follows:

[source,adoc]
-----
:lutaml-express-index: my_custom_name; dir_or_index_path[; cache=cache_path]
-----

Where:

* `my_custom_name` - is name of the parsed EXPRESS files context for the later
use with lutaml macro

* `dir_or_index_path` - location of directory with EXPRESS files or path to the
YAML index file to parse

* `cache_path` - optional, location of the Expressir cache file to use

Example of usage:

[source,adoc]
-----
= Document title
Author
:lutaml-express-index: my_custom_name; /path/to/express_files; cache=/path/to/cache_file.yaml
[lutaml,my_custom_name,my_context]
----
{% for schema in my_context.schemas %}
== {{schema.id}}
{% endfor %}
----
-----

=== Usage, `lutaml_diagram` macro

This macro allows to quickly render lutaml file as diagram image.
Given `example.lutaml` file with the content:

[source,java]
----
diagram MyView {
  title "my diagram"

  enum AddressClassProfile {
    imlicistAttributeProfile: CharacterString [0..1] {
      definition
        this is multiline with `ascidoc`
      end definition
    }
  }

  class AttributeProfile {
    +addressClassProfile: CharacterString [0..1]
    imlicistAttributeProfile: CharacterString [0..1] {
      definition this is attribute definition
    }
  }
}
----

And the `lutaml_diagram` macro:

[source,adoc]
-----
lutaml_diagram::example.lutaml[]
-----

Will add diagram image to the document

Also one can use `lutaml_diagram` block with embed lutaml code instead of block macro. Example:

[source,java]
----
[lutaml_diagram]
....
diagram MyView {
  title "my diagram"

  enum AddressClassProfile {
    imlicistAttributeProfile: CharacterString [0..1] {
      definition
        this is multiline with `ascidoc`
      end definition
    }
  }

  class AttributeProfile {
    +addressClassProfile: CharacterString [0..1]
    imlicistAttributeProfile: CharacterString [0..1] {
      definition this is attribute definition
    }
  }
}
....
----


=== Usage, `lutaml_uml_attributes_table` macro

This macro allows to quickly render data model attributes/values tables.

Given `example.lutaml` file with the content:

[source,java]
----
diagram MyView {
  title "my diagram"

  enum AddressClassProfile {
    imlicistAttributeProfile: CharacterString [0..1] {
      definition
        this is multiline with `ascidoc`
      end definition
    }
  }

  class AttributeProfile {
    +addressClassProfile: CharacterString [0..1]
    imlicistAttributeProfile: CharacterString [0..1] {
      definition this is attribute definition
    }
  }
}
----

And the `lutaml_uml_attributes_table` macro:

[source,adoc]
-----
[lutaml_uml_attributes_table, example.lutaml, AttributeProfile]
-----

Will produce this output:

[source,adoc]
-----
=== AttributeProfile


.AttributeProfile attributes
|===
|Name |Definition |Mandatory/ Optional/ Conditional |Max Occur |Data Type

|addressClassProfile |TODO: enum 's definition |M |1 | `CharacterString`

|imlicistAttributeProfile |this is attribute definition with multiply lines |M |1 | `CharacterString`

|===
-----

In case of "enumeration"(AddressClassProfile) entity:

[source,adoc]
-----
[lutaml_uml_attributes_table, example.lutaml, AddressClassProfile]
-----

Will produce this output:

[source,adoc]
-----
=== AddressClassProfile


.AddressClassProfile values
|===
|Name |Definition

|imlicistAttributeProfile |this is multiline with `ascidoc`

|===
-----

=== Usage, `lutaml_uml_datamodel_description` macro

This macro allows to quickly render data model packages and its dependent
objects for supplied XMI file.

Given an Enterprise Architect `example.xmi` file with 2 packages:

* 'Another'
* 'CityGML'

The `lutaml_uml_datamodel_description` macro can be used:

[source,adoc]
-----
[lutaml_uml_datamodel_description, path/to/example.xmi]
--
[.before]
...
my text
...

[.diagram_include_block, base_path="requirements/"]
...
Diagram text
...

[.include_block, package="Another", base_path="spec/fixtures"]
...
my text
...

[.include_block, base_path="spec/fixtures"]
...
my text
...

[.before, package="Another"]
...
text before Another package
...

[.after, package="Another"]
...
text after Another package
...

[.after, package="CityGML"]
...
text after CityGML package
...

[.after]
...
footer text
...
--
--
-----

Where:

* `path/to/example.xmi` - required, path to the XMI file to render

* `[.before]` - macro to add additional text before the rendered output, can be used only once, additional occurrences of macro will overwrite text

* `[.after]` - macro to add additional text after the rendered output, can be used only once, additional occurrences of macro will overwrite text

* `[.after, package="Another"]` - macro with text to be inserted before(after in case of `.before` name) the package

* `[.diagram_include_block]` - macro to automatically include diagram images. Attribute `base_path` is a required attribute to supply path prefix where to look for a digram image. The logic is as follows:
[source,adoc]
-----
{% for diagram in package.diagrams %}
[[figure-{{ diagram.xmi_id }}]]
.{{ diagram.name }}
image::{{ image_base_path }}/{{ diagram.xmi_id }}.png[]

{% if diagram.definition %}
{{ diagram.definition | html2adoc }}
{% endif %}
{% endfor %}
-----
Eg: script will take package diagrams supplied in xmi file and will try to include `image` with the name equal to diagram' xmi_id attribute plus `.png`. Also one can add any text to the macro text, it will be added as paragraph before each image include.

* `[.diagram_include_block, package="Another"]` - same as above, but diagram will be included only for supplied package name

* `[.include_block, base_path="spec/fixtures"]` - macro to inlude files(adoc/liquid) for each package name. Attribute `base_path` is a required attribute to supply path prefix where to look for file to include. Macro will look for a file called `base_path` + `/` `_package_name`(downcase, replace : -> '', ' ' -> '_') + `.adoc`[`.liquid`], eg for package 'My Package name' and `base_path` eq to `my/path`, macro will look for the following file path: `my/path/_my_package_name.adoc`.

* `[.include_block, package="Another", base_path="spec/fixtures"]` - same as above, but include block will be included only for supplied package name

In addition to macroses listed above that can be used only inside `lutaml_uml_datamodel_description` macro there is another macro called `lutaml_figure`. `lutaml_figure` is used to lookup and reference xmi package diagrams. The syntax is as follows:

[source,adoc]
-----
This is lutaml_figure::[package="Wrapper root package", name="Fig B1 Full model"] figure
-----

This code will be transformed into `<<figure-{diagram.xmi_id}>>` and will point to diagram figure. One can only use this macro when document rendered `lutaml_uml_datamodel_description` macro as it needs diagram lookup table in order to refernce package diagram.

Will produce this output:

[source,adoc]
-----
my text
== CityGML package
=== CityGML overview

Diagram text

[[figure-EAID_ACBB5EE3_3428_40f5_9C7C_E41923419F29]]
.CityGML Package Diagram
image::requirements//EAID_ACBB5EE3_3428_40f5_9C7C_E41923419F29.png[]

BuildingFurnitureFunctionValue is a code list that enumerates the different purposes of a BuildingFurniture.

[[figure-EAID_938AE961_1C57_4052_B964_997D1894A58D]]
.Use of ISO and OASIS standards in CityGML
image::requirements//EAID_938AE961_1C57_4052_B964_997D1894A58D.png[]

The CityGML package is organized into
2 packages with 1 modules:

[arabic]
. Another package
. CityTML package

my text

Content for CityGML package

==== Defining tables

[arabic]
.<<tab-P-another-C-abstractatomictimeseries>> -- Elements of Another::AbstractAtomicTimeseries

[[tab-P-another-C-abstractatomictimeseries]]
.Elements of Another::AbstractAtomicTimeseries
[width="100%",cols="a,a,a,a,a,a,a,a"]
|===
h|Name: 7+| AbstractAtomicTimeseries
h|Definition: 7+|
h|Stereotype: 7+| interface
h|Abstract: 7+|
.1+h|Associations: 7+| (none)
.4+h|Public attributes:
| _Name_
2+| _Definition_
| _Derived_
| _Obligation_
| _Maximum occurrence_
| _Data type_
| adeOfAbstractAtomicTimeseries
2+|
|
| C
| *
| ADEOfAbstractAtomicTimeseries
| observationProperty
2+|
|
| M
| 1
| CharacterString
| uom
2+|
|
| C
| 1
| CharacterString
h|Constraints: 7+| (none)
|===

=== Additional Information

text after CityGML package
-----

In addition to just supplying XMI file, this macro also supports YAML
configuration file.

The format for using YAML is this:

[source,yaml]
-----
---
packages:
  # includes these packages
  - "Package *"
  - two*
  - three
  # skips these packages
  - skip: four
-----

Where:

* `packages` - required, root element with the list of strings or objects

* `Package *` - pattern matching, specifies lookup condition for packages to
render.
+
NOTE: In this example, it is equal to the following regular expression: `/^Package.*$/`

* `skip: four` - object with package name to skip

Usage with macro:

[source,adoc]
-----
[lutaml_uml_datamodel_description, path/to/example.xmi, path/to/config.yml]
....
-----

The macro processor will read supplied YAML file and arrange packages according
to the order supplied in the config file, also all packages supplied as `skip`
will be skipped during render

== Documentation

Please refer to https://www.metanorma.com.
